Docs for new command `dvc check-ignore` (#1629)
iterative/dvc.org: content/docs/command-reference/check-ignore.md

# check-ignore

> Used for debugging `.dvcignore` / exclude files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check whether any given files or directories are excluded from DVC via
`.dvcignore`.
```

## Synopsis

```usage

> usage: usage: dvc check-ignore [-h] [-q | -v] [-d] [-n] targets [targets ...]

Reviewer: 72 char lines for code blocks so:
```suggestion
usage: usage: dvc check-ignore [-h] [-q | -v] [-d] [-n]
                               targets [targets ...]
```

# check-ignore

Used for debugging `.dvcignore` / exclude files.

## Synopsis

```usage
usage: usage: dvc check-ignore [-h] [-q | -v] [-d] [-n]
                               targets [targets ...]

positional arguments:

>   targets        Input files/directories to check ignore patterns.

Reviewer: Why "inputs"?
files/directories -> paths?
Does it accept ignore patterns as targets?

Reviewer: > Q though: Does it accept ignore patterns as targets?

I see it does from the example. So this should be mentioned in the `targets` short desc. I'm not committing this here yet because it affects the core repo. Will comment on that PR...

Reviewer: From https://github.com/iterative/dvc/pull/4282#pullrequestreview-460270636:
```suggestion
  targets        File or directory paths, or ignore patterns to check
```

Reviewer 2: @jorgeorpinel 

`or ignore patterns` is not correct most likely

Reviewer: @shcheklein I think it's accurate. The argument help output is currently "Exact or wildcard paths of files or directories to check ignore patterns." (see https://github.com/iterative/dvc/pull/4282/files/930534ba85e83d34a45eead6e88a4722818af918#diff-655baccc374b563195716833da22b3baR64-R68)

Reviewer: Committing this for now.

```

## Description

For each pathname given via the command-line , check whether the file is excluded 

> by `.dvcignore` output the path if it is excluded.

Reviewer: ``This helper command checks whether the given `targets` are ignored by DVC according to the [`.dvcignore` file](/doc/user-guide/dvcignore) (if any). The ones that are indeed ignores are printed back.``

Reviewer 2: Let's include a link to the user guide Dvcignore section so that users can see the logic behind it. It would be great to mention this new command in that section as well.

Reviewer: OK, it's in my suggestion:
```suggestion
This helper command checks whether the given `targets` are ignored by DVC
according to the [`.dvcignore` file](/doc/user-guide/dvcignore) (if any). The
ones that are indeed ignores are printed back.
```
Committing.

Reviewer: - [ ] It would be great to mention this new command in that section as well.

Indeed. Unresolving...

## Options

- `-h`, `--help` - prints the usage/help message, and exit.

- `-q`, `--quiet` - do not write anything to standard output. Exit with 0 if no
  problems arise, otherwise 1.

- `-v`, `--verbose` - displays detailed tracing information.

> - `-d`, `--details` - Show the exclude pattern together with the path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `-d`, `--details` - show the exclude pattern together with the path.
```

> - `-d`, `--details` - show the exclude pattern together with the path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `-d`, `--details` - show the exclude pattern together with each target path.
```

- `-n`, `--non-matching` - Show given paths which don’t match any pattern. Only

>                       used when --details is enabled.

Reviewer: Let's put these 2 on top, before -h -q -v.

>   Only usable when `--details` is also employed

Reviewer: Let's put these 2 on top, before -h -q -v.

Reviewer: Resolved in https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/pull/1629#pullrequestreview-462178601

> - `-n`, `--non-matching` - Show given paths which don’t match any pattern. Only
>                       used when --details is enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `-n`, `--non-matching` - show the target paths which don’t match any pattern.
  Only usable when `--details` is also employed
```

## Examples

First, let's create a `.dvcignore` file with some patterns in it, and some files

> to check.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to check against it.
```

due to the patterns found in [`.dvcignore`](/doc/user-guide/dvcignore).

## Synopsis

```usage
usage: usage: dvc check-ignore [-h] [-q | -v] [-d] [-n]
                               targets [targets ...]

positional arguments:
  targets        Input files/directories to check ignore patterns.
```

## Description

For each pathname given via the command-line , check whether the file is excluded 
by `.dvcignore` output the path if it is excluded.

## Options

- `-h`, `--help` - prints the usage/help message, and exit.

- `-q`, `--quiet` - do not write anything to standard output. Exit with 0 if no
  problems arise, otherwise 1.

- `-v`, `--verbose` - displays detailed tracing information.

- `-d`, `--details` - show the exclude pattern together with each target path.

- `-n`, `--non-matching` - show the target paths which don’t match any pattern.
  Only usable when `--details` is also employed

## Examples

First, let's create a `.dvcignore` file with some patterns in it, and some files
to check against it.

```dvc
$ echo "file*\n\!file2" >> .dvcignore
$ cat .dvcignore
file*
!file2
$ touch file1 file2 other
$ ls
file1  file2 other
```

> Then, let's check if they were excluded by `.dvcignore`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, let's check if these files would be excluded given our `.dvcignore` file:
```

```dvc
$ dvc check-ignore file1
file1

> $ dvc check-ignore file2
> file2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ dvc check-ignore file1 file2
file1
file2
```

Reviewer: Committing.

> $ dvc check-ignore other

Reviewer: How about
```suggestion
$ dvc check-ignore other
  # Nothing is printed back, meaning other is not excluded.
```
to make it extra clear?

Reviewer: Committing.

$ dvc check-ignore file*
file1
file2 
```

> If `--details` is specified, the output is a series of lines of the form:
> `<source> <COLON> <linenum> <COLON> <pattern> <HT> <pathname>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `--details` option is used, a series of lines are printed using this format:
`<source> <COLON> <linenum> <COLON> <pattern> <HT> <pathname>`
```

> `<source> <COLON> <linenum> <COLON> <pattern> <HT> <pathname>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`.dvcignore:<line number>:<pattern> <HT> <target path>`
```
- Why `<source>`? It's always `.dvcignore` right? Or because of nested ones? If so maybe use `<path/to/>.dvcignore`
- What's <HT>? Please replace with actual character.

Reviewer: @karajan1001 actually I'm not sure what the answers are here, can you check it? Thanks

Author: @jorgeorpinel, 
Not always `.dvcignore`, might be `data/.dvcignore` as well. We didn't restrict `.dvcignore` to the root of the repo.

Reviewer: OK so probably:
```suggestion
`<path/to/.dvcignore>:<line_num>:<pattern> | <target_path>`
```
> HT = horizontal tab, right?

```dvc

> $ dvc check-ignore -d file1
> .dvcignore:1:file*	file1
> $ dvc check-ignore -d file2
> .dvcignore:2:!file2	file2

Reviewer: Let's consolidate this one:
```suggestion
$ dvc check-ignore -d file1 file2
.dvcignore:1:file*	file1
.dvcignore:2:!file2	file2
```

$ dvc check-ignore -d other
$ dvc check-ignore -d file*
.dvcignore:1:file*	file1
.dvcignore:2:!file2	file2
```

> If `--non-matching` is specified, non-matching pathnames will also be 
> output, in which case all fields in each output record except for 
> <pathname> will be empty

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the `--non-matching` option, non-matching `targets` will also be 
included in the list. All fields in each line, except for `<target path>`, will
be empty.
```

# check-ignore

Check whether any given files or directories are excluded from DVC
due to the patterns found in [`.dvcignore`](/doc/user-guide/dvcignore).

## Synopsis

```usage
usage: usage: dvc check-ignore [-h] [-q | -v] [-d] [-n]
                               targets [targets ...]

positional arguments:
  targets        File or directory paths, or ignore patterns to check
```

## Description

This helper command checks whether the given `targets` are ignored by DVC
according to the [`.dvcignore` file](/doc/user-guide/dvcignore) (if any). The
ones that are indeed ignores are printed back.

## Options

> - `-h`, `--help` - prints the usage/help message, and exit.
> 
> - `-q`, `--quiet` - do not write anything to standard output. Exit with 0 if no
>   problems arise, otherwise 1.
> 
> - `-v`, `--verbose` - displays detailed tracing information.
> 
> - `-d`, `--details` - show the exclude pattern together with each target path.
> 
> - `-n`, `--non-matching` - show the target paths which don’t match any pattern.
>   Only usable when `--details` is also employed

Reviewer: Per https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/pull/1629#pullrequestreview-457172831:

```suggestion
- `-d`, `--details` - show the exclude pattern together with each target path.

- `-n`, `--non-matching` - show the target paths which don’t match any pattern.
  Only usable when `--details` is also employed

- `-h`, `--help` - prints the usage/help message, and exit.

- `-q`, `--quiet` - do not write anything to standard output. Exit with 0 if no
  problems arise, otherwise 1.

- `-v`, `--verbose` - displays detailed tracing information.
```

Committing.

# check-ignore

Check whether any given files or directories are excluded from DVC due to the
patterns found in [`.dvcignore`](/doc/user-guide/dvcignore).

## Synopsis

```usage
usage: usage: dvc check-ignore [-h] [-q | -v] [-d] [-n]
                               targets [targets ...]

positional arguments:

>   targets        File or directory paths to check (wildcards supported)

Reviewer 2: I think wildcard == multiple targets. It's not a special support from DVC. The same applies to all other commands, I guess, in DVC that support file path targets.

Reviewer: You're right. The shell will expand the wildcard into multiple arguments, right? So we can just not mention this here.

> I did add a note about it in the description as it's a pretty useful trick for this one command.

Reviewer: Removed in #1673

```

## Description

This helper command checks whether the given `targets` are ignored by DVC
according to the [`.dvcignore` file](/doc/user-guide/dvcignore) (if any). The
ones that are ignored indeed are printed back.

> > Note that your shell may support path wildcards such as `dir/file*` and these

Reviewer 2: same - it's fine to keep it here, but that what I would expect anyways since multiple targets are supported. A bit not consistent since we don't make notes like this in other commands.

Reviewer: Oh I see you noticed the note. Yeah any other commands where this note would be especially relevant? add/commit/remove? status/repro? fetch/pull/push? metrics/plots? (un)freeze?

Reviewer: I guess best to just remove it...

Reviewer: Also removed in #1673

> can be fed as `targets` to `dvc check-ignore`, as shown in the
> [examples](#examples).

## Options

- `-d`, `--details` - show the exclude pattern together with each target path.

- `-n`, `--non-matching` - show the target paths which don’t match any pattern.
  Only usable when `--details` is also employed

- `-h`, `--help` - prints the usage/help message, and exit.

- `-q`, `--quiet` - do not write anything to standard output. Exit with 0 if no
  problems arise, otherwise 1.

- `-v`, `--verbose` - displays detailed tracing information.

## Examples

First, let's create a `.dvcignore` file with some patterns in it, and some files
to check against it.

```dvc
$ echo "file*\n\!file2" >> .dvcignore
$ cat .dvcignore
file*
!file2
$ touch file1 file2 other
$ ls

> file1  file2 other

Reviewer 2: some extra space?

Reviewer: Done. #1673

```

Then, let's use `dvc check-ignore` to see which of these files would be excluded
given our `.dvcignore` file:

```dvc
$ dvc check-ignore file1
file1
$ dvc check-ignore file1 file2
file1
file2
$ dvc check-ignore other
  # There's no command output, meaning `other` is not excluded.
$ dvc check-ignore file*
file1
file2
```

If the `--details` option is used, a series of lines are printed using this

> format: `<path/to/.dvcignore>:<line_num>:<pattern> | <target_path>`

Reviewer 2: Can be part of the option description.

Reviewer: Moved in #1673 as well
